The DataFrame data structure is
the heart of the Panda's library.
It's a primary object that
you'll be working with
in data analysis
and cleaning tasks.
The DataFrame is conceptually
a two-dimensional series object,
where there's an index and
multiple columns of content,
with each column having a label.
In fact, the distinction
between a column and
a row is only a
conceptual distinction,
and you can think of
the DataFrame itself as
simply a two-axis labeled array.
Let's start by importing
our panda's library.
So import pandas as pd.
I'm going to jump
in with an example.
Let's create three school records
for students and
their class grades.
I'll create each as a series
which has a student name,
the class name, and the score.
So record1 is pd.Series, and
we'll use a dictionary here
and we'll say the student's
name is Alice,
the class is physics,
and the score she got was 85.
Record2 the name is Jack,
the class is chemistry,
and the score is 82.
And for record3 we'll set the name
of the student to Helen,
the class is Biology,
and the score is 90.
So like a series the
DataFrame object is indexed.
I'll use a group of series,
where each series
represents a row of data.
Just like the series function,
we can pass in our individual
items in an array and
we can pass in our index
values as second arguments.
So df is a common name for
a DataFrame equals pd.DataFrame,
and we'll pass in record1,
record2, record3 as our arrays,
and we'll just say our index is
school1, school2 and school1.
And, just like the series, we
can use the head function
to see the first several
rows of the DataFrame,
including indices from both axis,
and we can use this to verify
the columns and
the rows, so df.head.
You'll notice here the Jupyter
creates a nice bit of
HTML to render the results
of the DataFrame.
So we have the index,
which is the leftmost column
and is the school name,
and then we have
the rows of data,
where each row has a
column header which was
given in our initial
record directories.
An alternative method is that
you could use a list
of dictionaries,
where each dictionary
represents a row of data.
So students equals
and then we'll make
a dictionary in this list,
and we'll say Alice,
Physics, and the Score.
Then the next dictionary
is Jack, Chemistry,
and the Score, and then Helen,
Biology and her Score of 90.
Then we pass this list of
dictionaries into
the DataFrame function.
So df equals pd.DataFrame and
would just pass
the list of students,
and we say we want
to index them as
school1, school2, and school1.
Let's print this
again with df.head.
So similar to the series,
we can extract data using
the .iloc and .loc attributes.
Because the DataFrame
is two-dimensional,
passing a single value to
loc indexing operator will
return the series if there's
only one row to return.
For instance, if we
wanted to select
data associated with school2,
we would just query the .loc
attribute with one parameter.
So df.loc, it's our index
so the value we're
looking for is school2.
You'll note that the name of
the series is returned
as the index value,
while the column name is
included in the output.
We can check the data type of
the return using
the python type function.
So just type df.loc [school2],
and we can see here it's
pandas.core.series.Series.
It's important to remember that
the indices and
column names along
either axis horizontal or
vertical, could be non-unique.
In this example, we see
two records for school1
as different rows.
If we use a single value with
the DataFrame lock attribute,
multiple rows of the
DataFrame will be return,
not as a new series,
but as a new DataFrame.
So let's query for
school1 records.
So df.loc [school1].
Here we can see the type of
this is actually different too.
So type df.loc [school1],
and that's actually a
pandas.core.frame.DataFrame.
One of the powers of
the panda's DataFrame,
is that you can quickly select
data based on multiple axis.
For instance, if
you wanted to just
list the student names
for school1,
you can supply
two parameters to.loc,
one being the row index
and the other being
the column name.
So for instance, if we're only
interested in
school1 student names,
we can say df.loc [school1]
as the first parameter,
and name as the second parameter.
Remember, just like the series,
the Panda's developers have
implemented this using
indexing operators and
not parameters to a function.
So what would we do
if we want it to
select a single column row?
Well, there's a few mechanisms.
First, we could
transpose the matrix.
This pivots all of the rows into
columns and all of the
columns into rows,
and it's done with
the T attribute. So df.T.
Then we can use the.lock on
the transpose to get
the student names only.
So df.T.loc[name].
However, since iloc and loc
are used for row selection,
Panda reserves
the indexing operator
directly on the DataFrame
for column selection.
In a Panda's DataFrame,
columns always have a name.
So this selection is
always label based,
and it's not as confusing
as it was when using
the square bracket operator
on the series objects.
For those familiar with
relational databases,
this operator is analogous
to column projection.
So df[name], and that
projects the name column
and you'll note the index
is still in there.
In practice, this works
really well since
you're often trying to
add or drop new columns.
However, this means that you
can get a key error when you
try and use the .lock
with a column name.
So df.loc[Name] and
that produces this
big nasty looking key error here.
Note too that the result of
a single column projection
is a Series object.
So we look at type of df[name],
we see it's a
pandas.core.series.Series.
Since the result of using
the indexing operator is
either a DataFrame or series,
you can chain
operations together.
For instance, we can select
all of the rows which
related to school1 using.loc,
then project the name
column for just those rows.
So df.loc [school1].
So that's our row.
We only want those that involve
school1 based on the index,
but then we'll project using
[Name] at the very end,
just the Name column.
If you get confused, you
can use type to check
the responses from
resulting operations.
So if you print the type
of df.loc [school 1],
this should be a data frame.
If you print the type of
df.loc [school1] [Name],
this should be a series.
Chaining, by indexing on
the return type of another index,
can come with
some cost and is best
avoided if you can
use another approach.
In particular, chaining tends
to cause Pandas to return
a copy of the DataFrame
instead of a view
on the DataFrame.
For selecting data,
this is not a big deal,
though might be slower
than necessary.
If you are chaining data though,
it's an important distinction,
because this can be
a source of error.
Here's another approach.
As we saw.loc does row selection,
and it can take two parameters,
the row index, and
the list of column names.
The .loc attribute also
supports slicing.
If we wanted to select all rows,
we can use a colon to
indicate a full slice
from beginning to end.
This is just like slicing
characters in a list in Python.
Then we can add the column name
as the second parameter
as a string.
If we wanted to include
multiple columns,
we could do so in a list,
and pandas will bring back
only the columns that
we've asked for.
Here's an example, where we
ask for all of the names and
scores for all schools
using the.loc operator.
So df.loc and I want all schools.
So I'm just going to put
a colon as the first parameter,
though the row index selection,
and then as the second parameter,
I want to project the name
and the score as columns.
Take a look at that again,
that the colon means that we
want to get all of the rows,
and the list and
the second argument position is
the list of the columns
that we want to get back.
That's selecting and
projecting data from
a DataFrame based on
row and column labels.
The key concepts to
remember are that rows
and columns are really
just for our benefit.
Underneath this is
just a two-axis labeled array,
and transposing the
columns is easy.
Also consider the issue of
chaining carefully
and try to avoid it,
as it can cause
some unpredictable results,
where your intent was to obtain
a different view of the data,
but instead Pandas
returns to you a copy.
Before we leave the discussion
of accessing data in DataFrames,
let's talk about dropping data.
It's easy to delete data
in series and DataFrames,
and we can use
the drop function to do so.
This function takes
a single parameter,
which is the index or
row label to draw.
This another tricky
place for new users.
The drop function
doesn't actually
change the DataFrame by default,
instead the drop function
returns to you
a copy of the DataFrame with
the given rows removed.
So if we do df.drop(school1),
it looks like a nice
changed DataFrame.
But if we look at
our original DataFrame,
we see the data is actually
still intact, so df.
Drop has two interesting
optional parameters.
The first is called in-place,
and if it's set to true,
the DataFrame will be updated in
place instead of
a copy being returned.
The second parameter is
the axes, which
should be dropped.
By default this value is zero,
indicating the row axis.
But you can change it to
one if you wanted
to drop a column.
For example, let's make a copy of
the DataFrame using
the .copy function.
So copy_df equals df.copy.
Now let's drop the name
column in this copy.
So copy df.drop, we say
the column we want to drop name,
we say in-place equals the true,
and then we set the axis because,
it doesn't know that
this is a column.
We set the axis equal to one to
tell it that this
is named column,
and then printout copy_df.
There is a second way
to drop a column,
and that's directly through
the use of the indexing operator,
using the del keyword.
This way I'm dropping
data, however,
takes immediate effect on
the DataFrame and does
not return a view.
So if we just say
del copy_df [class],
and then printout copy_df,
we see the class is gone.
Finally, adding a new column
to the DataFrame is as
easy as signing it to
some value using
the indexing operator.
For instance, if we
wanted to add a class
ranking column with
default value of None,
we could do so by using
the assignment operator
after the square brackets.
This broadcasts the default value
to the new column immediately.
So df[ClassRanking]
equals None and print df.
In this lecture, you've learned
about the data structure
you'll use the most in
pandas, the DataFrame.
The DataFrame is indexed
both by row and column,
and you can easily select
individual rows and project
the columns you're interested in,
using the familiar
indexing methods
from the Series class.
You'll be gaining a lot
of experience with
the DataFrame in
the content more to come.